[THEME MUSIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: In the
last eight decades
of Barbara Marx
Hubbard's life, she
has witnessed the creation
of the commercial airplane,
television, space travel, the
personal computer, and the cell
phone, among so
many other things.
Yet this is just a
blip in comparison
to the creation of humanity.
Hi.
I am Lisa Garr.
And joining me is American
visionary, Barbara Marx
Hubbard, to share with us
the story of evolution,
from creation to
the universal humans
and how we're all a part of
this conscious evolution.
Welcome.
>>BARBARA MARX HUBBARD:
Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: Wow.
You have seen so much
in your lifetime,
yet you have so much more to go.
>>HUBBARD: Well,
you know, if you
take an evolutionary
perspective and you look back--
and you see 13.7 billion years
ago was the Big Bang, universe,
Earth, life, animal life,
human life, and now us.
If you have an evolutionary
perspective on how long
nature has been evolving and
then you put yourself in that,
you feel new all the time
because it's growing.
>>LISA: I love that.
I love that perspective.
Now, when you're talking
about this cycle,
it seems that chaos has
preceded every bit of evolution
that you just described.
>>HUBBARD: This is very true.
Crisis precedes transformation.
And problems are evolutionary
drivers in nature.
And when a species
isn't working--
there have been five
mass extinctions
before we got here because
not everything works.
But nature selects from
that which can create more.
Nature is constantly selecting
for higher consciousness,
more freedom of movement,
more complexity and love.
This is such a great impulse.
I feel when we have a
crisis that the impulse has
the potential, I say, if we
know we're going somewhere
we want to go.
That's the key.
>>LISA: That's the key.
I mean, you've heard the
chaos theory and that order
comes out of chaos.
So is that what has happened?
Is it the sense
of order has come
after these mass extinctions?
>>HUBBARD: It's a little
bit more complex than that.
A system is dysfunctional.
Meanwhile, innovations are
cropping up everywhere.
Let's take our system.
>>LISA: For example, yeah.
>>HUBBARD: And at
first, those innovations
look ineffective-- new
health, new education,
new kinds of personal growth.
But once they continue to
grow, nature converges them.
So while this system,
like a big system,
is getting dysfunctional,
these innovations
are getting more functional.
And here's the key.
At some point, they connect.
And there is a nonlinear,
exponential interaction
of innovation.
And you know what?
The system flips for billions
of years, from entropy--
disorder-- to
centropy-- higher order.
>>LISA: So it's predictable.
>>HUBBARD: It's
predictable now because we
have so many innovations.
And you've been in innovations
all your life of things
that are just emerging.
But they're getting more
and more mainstream, really,
whereas the functionality
is also more obvious.
>>LISA: So let's talk about this
in terms of our life right now,
current times--
crisis, chaos, unprecedented
change, constant disruption.
Are we in one of those cycles?
>>HUBBARD: Definitely.
We are in one of those very
amazing cycles, where it's even
more than just a
temporary cycle.
If we don't do
what's right now, we
can go down to devolution,
serious devolution
of many species and
maybe even ourselves.
At the same time, if
we were to say yes
to our innovations, our
creativity, our love,
and our potentiality,
and our high-tech genius,
we have powers, powers we used
to think were ancient gods.
So just to finish this
point, it's necessary.
Yes, we can go down.
But what's harder to
see, we could go way up.
>>LISA: Is it really
that big of a catastrophe
that we're in right now?
Because these other mass
extinctions were massive.
Do you think that
this has the power--
because of our environmental
crisis and this speed that
we're accelerating the
degeneration of our planet--
do you think that we really
could be in this place?
>>HUBBARD: I believe we can.
I believe what the
scientists are telling us.
It's not my personal research.
But I remember I was with Ervin
László in China and the big
environmental conference
about four years ago.
And he got up there-- all the
Chinese leaders in this field.
And he got up and
said, you know,
if we cannot change our
consciousness toward
environmental sustainability
and co-creation,
we will be extinct.
So I said to myself, OK.
If that's true, what is really
good about us that's growing?
And you know, there's a
lot about us I don't like.
I don't like the mass murder.
I don't like the separation.
I don't like the
abnormal cruelties.
Over here, there's things
we love about ourselves.
So I thought, let's get
together what nature does
and innovate what's
creative and convergent.
>>LISA: You asked that question
when you met Buckminster
Fuller--
what in life is good?
Was that it?
>>HUBBARD: It was a little
different than that.
I was doing a conference at
Southern Illinois University.
He was scholar-in-residence.
And I was talking about
positive options for the future
because my theme was, let's
find out what's working.
So he sent his director of
communications to the platform.
He heard me say this.
I didn't meet him yet.
And he said, I have
a proposal that I
think women should run
for political office
to tell what's positive.
And I propose Barbara
Marx Hubbard for president
of the United States.
It was just off the charts.
This was 1970.
And so, of course, the
students at Southern Illinois
University-- what do they know?
They thought it was great.
Everybody thought it was
great except my husband, who
was in the audience.
>>LISA: You said that,
and you didn't tell him?
>>HUBBARD: Tom
Turner, the director,
just got up and
said to everybody,
Dr. Fuller proposes that
Barbara Marx Hubbard
run for president of the United
States because women in general
should run for political office.
And because Barbara is
for what's positive,
she's one to do it.
He didn't mean that
I was the one--
women in general, and
I was one of them.
But when he said, she
should run for president,
I'll never forget the cheers of
the students-- who, as I say,
didn't know anything
about me, really--
and my husband.
>>LISA: Now, you were a
mother of five and married.
And one would think you
had a great life raising
five children.
But what happened
as a result of that?
>>HUBBARD: Well, I did have
a wonderful five children.
But I got depressed
after the fifth child.
Now, I was married in 1951.
We were told, have as
many babies as possible.
It was before any awareness
of population crisis,
environmental crisis.
So with the fifth child was
this really bad depression.
I've never felt it before.
I felt I was trapped in stone.
I could hardly talk.
And then something
clicked on in me
and said, if I'm
this depressed, I'm
going to find out
what would happiness
be like because I didn't know.
So I decided to
research happiness
in Lakeville, Connecticut.
And I went to ask
all my friends.
Are any of you
happy, really happy?
>>LISA: Really?
And what did they say?
>>HUBBARD: Not really.
They were content.
They were OK.
But I knew that inside of
me, while this was depressed,
there was something big.
And then I'll just tell you
briefly I met Abraham Maslow.
He wrote a book, "Toward
a Psychology of Being."
He was the first
psychologist in our time
to study wellness
rather than sickness.
>>LISA: Now, how did
you meet Abraham Maslow?
>>HUBBARD: Well,
I read his book.
I started to research.
And he said in
the book, be bold,
because here's the way
you get to be happy.
You find your life
purpose and say yes.
Everybody who was what he
called "self-actualizing"
had chosen work they found
intrinsically self-rewarding
and of purpose.
That could be being a mother
taking care of a child.
It could be a gardener.
It could be an innovator.
The key was chosen work
intrinsically self-rewarding
and of purpose.
Now, I was rewarded to
take care of my children.
But it wasn't actually
my chosen work.
>>LISA: Wow.
It's rewarding,
and it's priceless.
But you had another vocation.
>>HUBBARD: Then what
I realized in studying
Maslow is everyone who is
self-actualizing has chosen
vocation, a calling, a feeling
that this is very important.
And when I do it, I
feel self-rewarded.
And then I'm self-actualized.
>>LISA: But it's
important to recognize
not everyone is like that.
Some people are
absolutely OK with having
a straightforward job
and raising a family
and moving into retirement
and enjoying that.
That's OK, too.
>>HUBBARD: That's
fine if that's OK.
But when you really look
closely into a life--
because I was meeting a lot of
people who were supposedly OK.
But when I really
said, are you happy--
and I thought, life, liberty,
the pursuit of happiness.
I felt that life should
be something potent,
something important,
something great.
Now, that's a personal
impulse, of course.
But I found that people who were
comfortable with their lives
were not--
they didn't have what we would
call self-actualizing, deep joy
or pleasure in
what you're doing.
It was just OK.
Now, I don't actually think
that's all right for anyone.
>>LISA: Anyone?
>>HUBBARD: I mean, everyone
has inside them a yearning.
Now, they may not
have noticed it.
They may not have
said yes to it.
But the yearning is,
express your full potential.
I think nature slash God
put potential in everyone.
And therefore,
everyone's pleasure
is realizing that potential.
>>LISA: I could agree
with you because I
do know people that have gone
through that perfect trajectory
of a wonderful career, second
career, retirement, depression,
and then at that
look at mortality.
And it is a nowhere street.
And so you said a key
word there-- "yearning."
It's a yearning.
It's a hankering.
It owns you sometimes.
>>HUBBARD: And so then
the real great challenge
is to find that
particular expression that
matches your yearning and
realizes your potential.
Now, it's interesting.
You don't go to
college to learn that.
I went to Bryn Mawr.
Did they ask me
where is my yearning?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
What do I want to get a job in?
In Washington, DC-- that
type of thing and how could
I be good at certain things.
It was very intellectual.
And then there's a lot of
human potential movement.
But the thing that people
don't really focus on
is that everyone's yearning
from their potential
also calls for
vocation, expression.
And if a person can find
that, whether it be motherhood
or fishing or gardening--
I'm not making a judgment.
But you have to then--
I've seen people be
mothers that way.
Now, I was a really good mother.
I did everything
with my children.
But I was always
wondering, what am
I really supposed to do next,
because it wasn't my vocation.
And vocation is
like a given gift.
It's an inner drive.
I believe anyone who touches
their inner drive and says yes
gets--
that's what I got from Maslow.
They get not only
self-rewarded, but there's
an inner impulse of joy.
>>LISA: Ah, yes.
And it's not usually
easily satiated.
That's for sure.
>>HUBBARD: Well, it's
not meant to be satiated.
>>LISA: God, really?
>>HUBBARD: Oh, no,
because I'm 88.
And I was going to tell you
another time I was depressed.
One was before I
understood this.
After I had finished Birth
2012, which was a big event,
and I was there
in Santa Barbara,
somebody said to me,
Barbara, why don't you
declare victory and retire?
I'm 84 years old.
I had done a lot.
I was, first of
all, disappointed.
But I'll try.
I'm 84.
Am I this compulsive?
So I didn't know what to do.
I felt the depression coming in.
And I actually didn't care
whether I lived or died.
And then this young man
came in, Mark Gaffney,
who is an evolutionary genius.
And somebody asked us
to do an interview.
He began to speak to me about
his passion for the unique self
and the potential of humanity.
And I would say my memetic code.
You have a genetic
code, your genes.
Memetic code is your inner
impulsive creativity.
>>LISA: Your "me."
>>HUBBARD: Your me.
And a meme is a set of ideas
that turn you on and vocations
that turn you on.
And so I didn't know what that
might be, but I got turned on.
And that little
inner impulse of me,
which I would call
an evolutionary woman
impulse, an activation to find
greater purpose, turned on.
And now look at me--
from 84 to 88.
See, I wouldn't use
the word "satiated."
I feel emergent.
>>LISA: Even more than ever.
>>HUBBARD: And emergent
is a very good feeling.
>>LISA: Yeah, it
keeps you young.
>>HUBBARD: It keeps you new.
See, somebody has
said to me, Barbara,
do you feel you're
getting younger or older?
And I say, I'm getting newer.
Because why?
I'm saying yes to that
inner impulsive creativity.
And I also call it
a compass of joy.
Your joy turns on
when your yes--
>>LISA: Turns on.
>>HUBBARD: --turns
on your uniqueness.
And I really believe
nature made you that way.
It made every one of
us to feel joy when
we realize our true potential.
>>LISA: That's what
regeneration is.
>>HUBBARD: And then
you're regenerated.
And I actually don't quite use
that word anymore because--
>>LISA: I heard you
call it "regenopause."
>>HUBBARD: Yes.
I went through regenopause.
And regenopause was, of
course, I had no more eggs.
50 years old.
Well, I was 50, so I no
longer had my period.
No more eggs.
So then usually, it has been
said that it's a declining--
you're not so beautiful.
And you lose your
attractiveness and all.
So I was 50 with this.
And then I realized,
you know what?
I'm the egg now.
That is to say, I'm not
reproducing the species.
I'm giving birth to the
impulse inside myself.
And most women that I
know, just like you, Lisa--
you're not doing this because
you're forced to do this.
It's an impulse of creativity.
And you can see it in you.
So I then began to find what
is my impulsive creativity.
And basically, this book,
"Conscious Evolution"--
it was to make evolution
more conscious as to more
consciousness, more freedom,
more love, more creativity.
And as that happened,
I became joyful.
>>LISA: And continue to be.
>>HUBBARD: And now
you would never
use the word
"satiation" for this.
>>LISA: I will never
use that word again.
Thank you for that.
>>HUBBARD: And the word
"fulfilled" is all right.
But it's not like you're
filled up, and now that's it.
Because after Birth
2012, which was
a very big, successful
event, I could just say,
oh, I did something really good.
>>LISA: In the world.
>>HUBBARD: But the nature of
the impulse of creativity--
if you think of that spiral,
the core of the spiral
is creativity, more life,
more love, more purpose.
That's why I think life
extension is going to happen.
>>LISA: Life extension?
>>HUBBARD: Longer
and longer lives
and eventually understanding
the phenomenon of why
do the telomeres get short.
How could you help
them lengthen?
There's a huge industry
looking at this.
And I was talking
with one of them.
He was about 65.
He said, well, I don't know
that I have to really--
I don't know when I'll die.
Because the thing is, when
I get to be 88 like you,
Barbara, that means we will have
discovered at least five years
more, how to keep you alive
to 98 or 10 more years.
And then you get to 98.
But the aging process will be
so well-discovered by the time
you're 98, Barbara.
Now, I'm not saying
that I even care.
It's not that I have a
yearning for a long life.
But here's a clue.
If we live at a time of possible
breakdown of our entire system
and this is a time
of breakthrough,
I'm actually attracted
to the breakthroughs.
I want to be here to
see the convergence.
I want to be here to see
synergistic democracy.
>>LISA: You want to see it.
>>HUBBARD: I want
to be it and see it.
>>LISA: You want to
be it and see it.
I love the fact
that you in 1984 ran
on the vice
presidential candidate
on the Democratic ticket.
That is absolutely phenomenal.
And I actually
have a clip of it.
I found this clip because
everything that you're saying
can be said right
here, right now today.
Let's take a look at this.
[APPLAUSE]
>>HUBBARD: Thank you very much.
Thank you to the 202 delegates
who placed my nomination.
And thank you to the Democratic
Party and the American system
that allows a citizen
politician to come forth
and seek the nomination
for vice president.
The theme of my
campaign is to fulfill
the dream of a campaign
for a positive future.
In 1776, our forebears
freed the individual
from the tyranny of the
divine right of kings.
They stated the
self-evident truth
that all men are
created equal when there
was no equality in the world.
There were kings and subjects,
classes and races, sexism.
Yet the power of the word
of truth changed the world.
In 1984, we face a tyranny
far greater than King George.
And we are seeking a
freedom even greater
than that of the individual.
The tyranny we
face is the threat
of the extinction
of the human race.
And the freedom we seek
is the emancipation
of the genius of the human
race to fulfill our highest
potential.
>>LISA: Isn't that
still true today?
>>HUBBARD: Yes.
>>LISA: What do you
think when you see that?
>>HUBBARD: I'm actually
thrilled to know, first
of all, that I could do
it or anyone could do it.
Because the likelihood
of me as an unknown woman
being nominated
with 200 delegates
from the Democratic
National Convention
with no media, no money,
and no passes to the floor--
I got in through the
governor's wife of Colorado.
And I wasn't really
supposed to be there.
And I'll tell you how I did it.
I got, I think, 5:30
AM South Dakota caucus.
They had never heard of me.
That was just the one.
It could be anyone.
And I came in there.
I was a little
haggard-looking, like this.
[LAUGHTER]
My name is Barbara Marx Hubbard.
I'm running for vice
president of the United States
in order to map, track,
connect, and declare
what's working in the world.
That was the vice presidency,
the office for the future.
I'd like you to place my name
in nomination for vice president
so I can declare from
your great platform
that the Democratic Party
is interested in connecting
the positive.
And I'll give my votes
to Geraldine Ferraro.
>>LISA: Well, that worked.
>>HUBBARD: So they signed up.
And every single
group signed up.
And when the
Democratic Party heard
that I was the other
woman nominated,
I had over 200 delegates.
I was the only other one.
And they said, it's Barbara Marx
Hubbard then Geraldine Ferraro.
I said, you know what?
It really works.
>>LISA: Yes.
It really did.
>>HUBBARD: And I believe that
we will have what I called
an office for the future
to map, track, connect,
and communicate what's working--
that we'll have it in
the American democracy.
>>LISA: You believe that
will happen one day.
>>HUBBARD: Yes, I do.
>>LISA: You talked
about it in 1984.
And many of those things
that you were talking about
are still in existence
today, where we have tyranny,
where we have different types of
dysfunctions in the government.
Yet you still believe in
this office of the future.
>>HUBBARD: You know what?
I don't just believe.
I know that there are
innovations in every field.
And they're cropping up
every day, like that model.
Here's the breakdowns over here.
We have innovations--
you know this, Lisa--
in health, in education,
in resource management,
in life extension.
If you and I were to have a
program in which you really
connect all of those
things and then
imagine them working
cooperatively,
synergistically, you would
see a new world is already
rising in our midst because
the media doesn't get it.
The educational
systems don't tell you.
And it's very rare to
have a show like yours
where you seek it out.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
And this is the
whole-- as you say,
my vocation is to
get this information
into the mainstream.
>>HUBBARD: Now, do you get
satiated when you do it well?
>>LISA: No.
It is a yearning.
It is a yearning
that doesn't stop.
So you see this,
and you are right.
So those things
that you mentioned
about life extension
and different grassroots
organizations and health care--
these are all organizations
that are started
by individuals and
collective people,
but not by major government.
So what maybe you're saying
is this universal human,
this collective that we are,
are really the solution.
We're the ones that are
creating these experiments
and these companies.
>>HUBBARD: I would put it in
a really interesting way--
is that if you look at
the spiral of evolution,
and you see us going around
another turn in the spiral,
I believe a new human is
literally emerging everywhere.
Because there's no
reason to assume
this Homo sapiens sapiens
is it, that nature
did billions of years and
arrived at us and said,
this is it.
There's no way.
There have been geniuses.
There have been great
avatars in the past.
I would say I would be able
to demonstrate that there are
more people in
every field who are
yearning to be more and do more
and love more because they know
more.
They've got TV.
They've got internet.
Look at the younger generation.
There's nothing like it
when I was growing up,
nothing like it whatsoever.
So I feel that we are
becoming a new humanity.
And the new human has--
I'll tell you a few qualities.
The new human tends to
have a deep inner impulse
of creativity that
feels like it's
part of the process
of evolution itself.
I don't just have a
nice life purpose.
I feel that the purpose has me.
I am motivated by something
that feels real to me.
It's an evolutionary impulse.
The second thing-- when I say
yes to it or when any of us
say yes, the lid goes off
the top of our vocations.
We don't just want a nice,
comfortable job, and that's it,
and then retire when we're 60.
No.
I'll tell you, the lid goes
off the top of my vocation.
I'd like to see a planetary
awakening in love,
showing all the connections
on the internet.
I have a big vocation.
Am I going to achieve that?
I don't know.
But I wouldn't be
surprised that I will.
>>LISA: The technology
is available.
>>HUBBARD: All I need to do
is say yes, talk to others,
see who else says yes,
create an activity,
and then get a few wonderful,
well-known people to want
to do it.
And you know what?
It's doable.
>>LISA: That's a great
step process that you just
broke down there for us.
It's not just lofty thinking
and wishful thinking.
You actually have a
formula that you just said.
You say yes.
It takes the lid off.
You find like-minded people.
And you start creating together.
>>HUBBARD: And you start
envisioning and creating.
And you also start noticing
that the system either is going
to break down or go this way.
So you feel pretty reinforced
by the purpose of nature.
You feel reinforced by
the purpose of life,
by the purpose of spirit,
however you see spirit.
I feel spirit goes inside of
you for your great purpose.
>>LISA: You and I had
a great conversation
once about this
universal entrepreneur.
And it combines technology and
this we space and everything
that you're talking
about right now
to really co-create the future.
Can you tell us a little
bit more about that?
>>HUBBARD: Well. you
know, like you and I--
I'm an entrepreneur
in a very similar way.
But the entrepreneur is somebody
who wants to create something
and has to be able to generate
the resources to create it.
So you can be a very
small-scale entrepreneur.
You can be a large entrepreneur.
But it's different than
top-down capitalism
because the entrepreneurs
are themselves the agent
of evolution.
>>LISA: The self-starters,
the self-motivators.
>>HUBBARD: They're
the self-starters.
So the more
entrepreneurs we have
at whatever scale,
the more freedom
you're putting into
the economic system.
>>LISA: What if that
level of the entrepreneur
is so passionate but yet not
able to support their passion
or monetize their
passion or get set back
by their passion or sacrifice?
I know so many people who
have started businesses
and mortgaged their homes
and really put themselves
in financial debt.
How do you suggest to you
that person to keep going?
>>HUBBARD: Well, first
of all, it's very hard.
And nobody is
saying that's easy.
You have to network it.
You have to find others who
are excited by what you are.
You have to do some research.
And then you have to get
vocational arousal with others.
Now, that's a phrase I love.
>>LISA: Yes, I do.
>>HUBBARD: I feel
vocational arousal with you
because I have a similar
purpose of communicating
what's creative.
So if I were wanting to be
a small-scale entrepreneur--
which, in fact, I am
because I'm a speaker,
and I have to earn money
by doing this and so on--
what I need to do is find
others by reaching out.
And I will tell you
just this brief story.
When I met Maslow, he was
very, very positive with me.
And he said, I'm
going to give you
a list of 300 people whose names
I've collected all my life.
And he was the only psychiatrist
for the positive wellness
person at that time.
So he was being criticized by
the whole formal psychiatric
movement.
So 300 names that were like
Thomas Merton and Ervin László
and people I'd
never had heard of.
So I go back to Lakeville,
Connecticut, with 300 names.
So he said, be bold.
So I'll tell you what I did.
I decided to write a newsletter.
I called it "Center Letter."
I said, I'd like
to know what you
think is the next step
for the future good.
And if you tell me, I'm going
to publish what you say.
And I sent it to the 300 people.
>>LISA: Fantastic.
I mean, this is exactly
what we do today
with social media and
Facebook and surveys.
>>HUBBARD: So this
was a newsletter done
at the "Lakeville Journal."
So I didn't have all
the big stuff at all.
But here's what happened.
I got responses, and
then I wrote back.
And then I invited
them to lunch.
And I was in the network.
>>LISA: Brilliant.
>>HUBBARD: See?
So I feel there's no such
thing as you can't do it.
And I was fortunate.
So therefore, I'm
very compassionate.
If it's hard, you don't
want to jump off a cliff,
leave your job immediately,
and try to do it.
You have to reach
out and network.
And you have to test
out whether it's doable.
In other words, you have
to be sensible about this.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
We were talking about how
crisis precedes breakthroughs
and how this vocation
doesn't stop.
Look at these kids
from Parkland, Florida,
who had not only been through
an enormous amount of trauma
by having children--
their peers--
die around them and the
explosions of the gunfire
and the mourning, the loss.
They have moved
into massive action
and individually now are
moving into more massive action
and the support of
celebrities and funding.
I mean, it's an
incredible story.
>>HUBBARD: Well, that's
a story of leadership
among those students.
And some of them
must have said, we're
going to do
something about this.
Some of them must have.
And they must have reached
out and done enough.
And then what they did--
they were able to
communicate to the students
this is a great thing to do.
And those students' lives
will never be the same again.
That would be true
for any group.
>>LISA: And the
world witnessed it
>>HUBBARD: So you
need leadership.
You need leadership.
>>LISA: But it's interesting,
though, because it's time now
for those voices to be heard.
It's time now for this
type of movement to happen.
And these students-- it's a part
of their healing process, yes,
to be an action,
which is amazing.
But also, they're
being heard now.
>>HUBBARD: They're being heard.
They have the media to be heard.
They can communicate.
Any person who is able to
do that with a small group
around a deep issue like this--
and you asked me about
the #MeToo generation,
the #MeToo women.
Look what's happened.
It's an enormous movement.
It wasn't possible
before for that movement
to get started without media.
>>LISA: Without women
standing up and saying
just that-- saying
me, too, saying,
I want to find my tribe.
And we need to talk about this
and process this together.
>>HUBBARD: Yes.
I didn't have the kind of
trauma that a #MeToo woman had.
And I'm tremendously for it
and support it in every way.
But I think that the feminine
leadership at the next level
will be, how do you create
a better culture of love?
How do we create society
that isn't so separated?
How do we have relationships
with men and women
and people of different ages
and races that does better?
I think the women--
if I were in any
way involved in it--
would say, thank
you for the #MeToo.
And let's keep it going
as long as we need to.
But those of us who
are free to express,
let's have the we, too.
Where do we want to go?
A lot of the men
want to go there.
>>LISA: I agree.
And I am also looking
for that solution
to the #MeToo movement.
Yes, we need this
moment of awareness.
time of expression.
And then what?
What is the next step?
>>HUBBARD: A culture of love,
creativity, and holiness.
>>LISA: And co-creation.
>>HUBBARD: And
let's go to create
the culture we want for women.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's time.
>>HUBBARD: It is.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And we've seen it
in microcultures.
But now it's time to move
this to a different level.
>>HUBBARD: That's right.
It is.
The Native American
people know this.
>>LISA: Yes, very true.
It, I think, is easier now.
We were just giving the
example of the #MeToo movement,
of the Parkland students,
where it is easier
to actually come
up with solutions
and put them into action more
than it ever has been before.
>>HUBBARD: And there's so
many women who are doing it.
And I think we don't
get the media attention.
>>LISA: There's also so many
more issues, though, Barbara.
There's the animals.
There's so many more issues.
There's human trafficking.
There's other issues
that haven't had
the platform and the voice yet.
So how do you deal with
knowing that there is so
much devastation in the world?
Do you have bad
days around this?
>>HUBBARD: You know,
I have bad days,
yes, when I feel ineffective,
let's say whatever I might do
or the people I'm working with
might do would not be enough.
And you can get a
feeling of desperation.
Then what I realize is if
I gave into that feeling
of desperation of
being not enough,
then I would never be more.
And so I checked myself from
the feeling of desperation
to doing something to
make it better somewhere.
And usually it's reaching out.
And I find it's very important
to have people you can really
share with how you feel without
feeling you're desperate.
If I could call you,
Lisa, and say, today
I'm just not feeling as
though I can make it through,
and here's what I'm sharing,
what would you do to me?
Would you hit me over the
head and call me a failure?
Or would you--
>>LISA: Provide help, support?
>>HUBBARD: You probably would.
>>LISA: And that's
what community is for.
>>HUBBARD: And we need
that more than anything.
>>LISA: I think some of the
solutions that we've really
learned and as a part of this
series are exploring is--
universally, people say
to me these same things.
Reach out to someone.
Let them know you need help.
Look for community.
Look for support.
And this all has
to do with being
part of a tribe, part
of a member of something
bigger than you,
part of a whole.
>>HUBBARD: Part of a whole.
And then what
happens from that--
you get rewarded
by the wholeness.
And there's a
self-rewarding quality
whereby the state of being
itself can be self-rewarding.
And I don't say I'm always
this way, Lisa, by any means.
I could feel defeated
and desperate.
But the other
feeling is stronger.
There is always
something more I can do.
And there are enough
people now who are like us
that we don't ever need
to feel alone, actually.
>>LISA: Have you ever
been told-- well,
someone did tell
you to retire once.
But have you ever fallen
into that conversation of,
well, I'm old now.
And I don't feel that I'm aging.
Do you ever fall into
the aging conversation?
There's certainly a lot
of information about it.
>>HUBBARD: Well, I went
to a big aging conference.
It was really good
because they were all
so positive about aging.
George Campanelli-- it's a
large thing that he does.
But what I feel is that
unless you're sick,
which could happen
at any time of age,
aging makes you more creative,
more able to reach out,
more courageous, better.
>>LISA: In your view.
But what if you are sick?
>>HUBBARD: You could
be sick any time.
So sickness is something
to deal with if you're
depressed when you're 25.
Lots of suicides
are much younger--
not so much of the aging
people, but the younger people.
So then the question is what
to do about that problem.
But I wouldn't call it aging.
Now, there are people who,
when they age, lose vitality.
And they're OK with it.
If they're not OK
with losing vitality,
there's something they can do.
They can get on the telephone.
They can work with people.
So I like to say there's no such
thing as nothing you can do.
>>LISA: Well, take
for example my dad.
So my father is 80.
And he served in the
military and then became
an orthopedic
surgeon for 40 years,
was a great, great doctor,
one of the good guys
that would play comedy
tapes in the operating
room just to uplift patients.
And then he retired,
and he decided
he wanted to be a comedian.
So he went to comedy school.
>>HUBBARD: Oh, that's adorable.
>>LISA: And he did stand-up.
I mean, that's all these
great things in his life.
And as a result of the Agent
Orange from World War II,
he has leukemia.
And he's frustrated in his
ability to not be able to think
and remember because he's on
constant chemo treatments.
>>HUBBARD: Very hard.
>>LISA: And his mind is going.
And it's so hard for him
because he knows who he was
and what his potential is.
And he's got so much.
My job is to give him the
life force, is to remind him
every day why he needs to live.
>>HUBBARD: Is the leukemia
a deadly version of it?
>>LISA: It is.
>>HUBBARD: I have a chronic
lymphocytic leukemia,
which could become
deadly but isn't.
It's because it's a
particular kind of leukemia.
But when I heard
that, I said, no.
That can't be.
And I'm like your father.
I had so much more to give.
>>LISA: Momentum.
>>HUBBARD: And my
short-term memory
is not as good as it was.
That's really true.
>>LISA: That's really
good, actually.
>>HUBBARD: That's really true.
Well, I mean, I will just
put down my telephone.
I can't tell you how often I--
I don't know where I just
put it-- that type of thing.
So then I have to
deal with that.
So I've told myself
that my long-term memory
is getting better.
And it actually is because
I've noticed I remember
extremely well deep things.
But I remember into
the future sometimes
with extraordinary clarity.
>>LISA: What do you
mean into the future?
>>HUBBARD: Well, I'm
seeing what's possible.
And so I see this
planetary awakening
that will turn us
on on the internet.
If you asked me about that,
I have all the details
in my head.
And where did it come from?
Nobody told me this.
Nobody has this idea.
I have this idea.
I know what to do.
So I'm now saying
maybe so-called "aging"
is making it possible
for me to be even more
creative than I ever was.
Because my mind may not
have short-term memory,
but it surely has
long-term vision.
>>LISA: Do you think
that you may not
be burdened by the
everyday details of life
and you have more
expansive thoughts?
>>HUBBARD: Actually,
that's happening.
I can't remember them.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: Who needs them?
It doesn't matter.
Let's go after the
expansive thoughts.
Someone else can deal
with the cell phone.
I love that.
Do you get downloads?
>>HUBBARD: You know what?
I do.
I have a way of
getting downloads.
It's my journal.
And I'll just tell
you very briefly.
I have 202 volumes--
huge, huge.
I mean, it's my life mission.
So I get up in the morning,
and I get a cup of coffee.
I'm sure you'll be shocked,
but that's what I did.
And then I write my
mental situation.
Today, such and such happened.
This isn't working.
I can't figure this out.
I'm concerned about so-and-so.
Then I stop.
And I write, dearly beloved--
that's my idea for source--
double quotation marks.
What does this mean?
And I don't think.
I allow the-- I called
it "higher mind."
It's not channeling.
But the wisdom of higher mind,
however you want to call it,
knows.
Sometimes I've called
it my inner scripture.
The inner scripture of
what that inner knowing
is in relationship to a mental
currently problem is amazing.
So then I go back down with
my mental mind and say,
well, what about this?
And then deeper
mind comes back in.
And finally, then
I test things out.
And almost every great idea,
every insight I've ever had
has come from bringing
high-level intuition
into my mental mind.
>>LISA: So anyone can do this.
>>HUBBARD: Anyone.
Anyone.
>>LISA: It's a form
of automatic writing.
But it really is bringing
in your higher self.
>>HUBBARD: It's bringing
And it isn't channeling.
And it isn't I don't know
what I'm doing writing.
It's quite slow motion.
Mental mind is observing.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Keep going.
Because if you go in
with your mental mind
and think too
quickly, this stops.
And it's so good as a process.
I'm doing this course called
Awaken the New Species in You.
If you're awakening
to newness, you
need that journal to
bring the newness forward.
>>LISA: So you take people
into the writing exercises.
>>HUBBARD: Yes, everybody.
>>LISA: We actually
have a clip of this.
If you take a look
at this clip, you'll
see Barbara in her
writing process.
This is from a movie that's
been done about Barbara's life
called "American Visionary."
Take a look.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>HUBBARD: I was looking
at Earth from space.
And Earth was struggling to
breathe, running out of energy.
At one point, there was
a moment of shared pain
so great that we stopped.
And in that moment of stopping
through pain came empathy,
came love.
>> And Barbara, in this vision,
saw humanity combing our powers
with love, empathy,
and creativity.
Barbara is seen as the
mother of the entire field
of conscious evolution--
not just the mother of it,
but the grandmother of it.
>> Barbara has done more than
any single theorist to spread
the idea of conscious evolution.
She's been given
glimpses of the future.
But her time was really
not fully until now.
Barbara's quest is
to inform people
what it would look
like if we consciously
chose to evolve rather
than wait when there
is no time for biology to work.
>> She was seeing something
that was different,
the cutting edge of evolution.
>>HUBBARD: There will be a
shift of consciousness on planet
Earth--
the new potentials in humanity,
the alternative energy,
restorative justice,
the new economics.
War will be considered
outmoded and unnecessary.
I believe we will have
really developed communities
in outer space so
that we ourselves
will become extraterrestrials.
It's rife with possibility.
>>LISA: So that was a
movie done about your life.
And I got the opportunity
to be in that movie
as well, which was wonderful.
I love the fact that you
have contributed so much,
yet there is so much
more to go for you.
Tell me about this awakening
the species within.
>>HUBBARD: Well, I'm doing a
wonderful intensive for a year.
It's 52 weeks.
And each week, I
have a code that
came from what I call
my "universal self."
Now, my universal
self-- or yours,
or anyone's-- is
yourself in the future.
And it comes in
as who you are now
when you put your attention
on your deep and radical
potential.
So your universal
self is encoded
with what you are becoming.
And in Awaken the
New Species, we
put attention on
what we are becoming.
And it comes in.
And then we share it
with the inspired writing
and with the codes and with
very well-known speakers.
>>LISA: This is
a great idea when
you're trying to
figure out something
that hasn't been created yet.
That is a fantastic
creative visioning process.
>>HUBBARD: It's so good.
And what happens-- and I had
done this because of doing it
week after week with
all these students--
is that now I can feel it.
I've crossed over-- it's
an interesting phrase--
of being Homo sapiens
sapiens, looking
at my full potential self.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
>>HUBBARD: The full
potential self coming closer
and going like this.
So the crossing
over is the feeling
that whatever that
is inside you that
is your deep social and
spiritual potentiality
has incarnated as you.
>>LISA: So who is that universal
and that future Barbara?
What is she doing?
>>HUBBARD: She's here now.
>>LISA: She's here now.
What is she doing?
>>HUBBARD: Well, she is going
to awaken as many species
as she can.
And I'm also doing a
Church of Evolutionary Love
every Saturday.
It's 9:00 Pacific.
And it's to say the sacred story
of evolution is a sacred story.
And we have all the
biblical stories
and all the stories of so many
great avatars and cultures.
We all have one
single, great story--
is that from nothing at all has
been created everything that is
and that we are participants
in that creation.
The goal in the
early Christianity
was the second coming of Christ.
What's our goal?
You could say is that first
full coming of humanity.
>>LISA: Right,
the Christ within.
Yes.
>>HUBBARD: Christ
within and socially
and politically and economically
and environmentally.
So for me, the women awakening
the world, the Church
of Evolutionary Love, the
Awaken the New Species,
the kinds of thing
like you do on your--
all of that needs to
be placed together.
And we need to have a
collective experience
of our own greatness.
>>LISA: Essentially, it's
like creating a new religion
but without the dogma.
>>HUBBARD: There's no
dogma because we're all
making it happen.
>>LISA: It's a collective
religion of a universal story.
>>HUBBARD: And there
is no one prophet.
And there is a
universal story, which
is the 13.7 billion years.
>>LISA: Which we've
all been a part of.
>>HUBBARD: And so
we have one story.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
I see how aging isn't
an option for you.
I see how retirement
isn't an option for you
because there's so much
to think about and to do.
And you have spoken also
at technology companies,
at Singularity University,
in various places.
Tell me a little bit about
intentional communities
that you've witnessed and
seen and that you live in.
>>HUBBARD: Well,
the Sunrise Ranch
is an intentional community
founded by the Emissaries
of Divine Light.
And it's a place
where people come,
and they help run that ranch.
And they have speakers.
And they have a lot
of work that they do.
And there is a real
search there for how
do you actually co-create.
>>LISA: There are
many communities
like this around the world.
There's--
>>HUBBARD: Yeah.
And we're going to have a big
conference called Tribalize,
which is going to start soon.
And it's for all
the people working
on regenerative communities,
tribalizing the human species.
So Sunrise Ranch is a
locus and focus for that.
>>LISA: Talk about future.
I mean, this is a wonderful
idea of this community living
that lives off of the land.
Everyone in the
community has a job.
>>HUBBARD: Right.
They have a job that
is actually fruitful.
And people come in.
When we have our conference
for Awaken the New Species,
we'll have it at Sunrise Ranch.
And you are most
definitely invited.
>>LISA: Well, thank you.
Yes.
I mean, I love this.
>>HUBBARD: In November.
>>LISA: It's all working
towards the collective whole.
And it would bring a community
together-- not that that's
their only job in life.
They would have
outside jobs-- but yet
still require themselves
to do something
that contributes to the
greater role of the community.
>>HUBBARD: And many of them
don't have outside jobs.
They're really working to
make that community work.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
Fantastic idea.
I know that there
are so many things
that we can do in our future.
That's just I would see
a way of the future.
There are a lot
of new structures
that are being built like that,
not just apartment buildings.
But there are communities.
And people that live
in these new buildings
all commune together to
work within the community
of the building.
So there's ways that
entire cities are being
built around this structure.
>>HUBBARD: I think the
most important thing
we can do right now is connect
innovations already working
in an office for the future in
a public media new news show.
I want to do a new news show.
First I was going to tell
what's his name on CNN,
Anderson Cooper.
Can you give me 10 minutes
for the new news, please?
But I thought, why would
I get 10 minutes on CNN?
Why not have a new news show?
>>LISA: Yes.
I've had the same
exact vision, Barbara,
of a new show with solutions.
>>HUBBARD: And the new
news, and that's the news.
Actually, what doesn't
work is called the news.
That's wrong.
>>LISA: I agree 100%.
And I think it's irresponsible.
>>HUBBARD: It's not accurate.
>>LISA: I think it's
downright irresponsible.
>>HUBBARD: It's not accurate.
>>LISA: Not any longer.
I think we need to
have, here's the facts,
but here's 10 solutions.
>>HUBBARD: See, even the
word "solutions" you might--
the new news is what's new.
I wouldn't call it
like, I'm a solution.
Do you what I'm saying?
I'm an impulsive creation that's
doing this and this and this.
The word "solution" is a
little bit too limited.
Here's a problem.
Here's a solution.
Yes, that's good.
But we're talking about
building a culture of love,
of creativity, of wholeness.
That's not a solution
to a problem.
That's the evolution
of the species.
>>LISA: So it would be
news into the future.
>>HUBBARD: Yes, and wherever
innovations are working.
And I would take what Ilya
Prigogine-- won the Nobel Prize
for dissipative structures--
how did nature get
from disorder to higher order?
By connecting what's
innovative and creative
when the system
is dysfunctional.
We have a dysfunctional system.
We have innovations
that are rising.
So let's connect--
not only just connect,
but synergize, which
is, I need this.
Can you help me create that?
I will help you create
what you need to do--
vocational arousal
and joining genius.
>>LISA: Yes, yes, yes.
I end every show is asking
you, what is your biggest why?
>>HUBBARD: I thought about that
when you mentioned it to me.
My biggest why is
abnormal cruelty.
It's completely impossible for
me to accept abnormal cruelty,
whether it be to an animal,
or to one another, torture.
I mean, I cannot imagine it.
So then the biggest why
is, what happened there
that so many of us can be cruel?
And I've asked, is it
a nervous system defect
where empathy is not as natural
to some people as it could be?
Because if you are empathetic,
you could not do that.
You could not torture another
person if you were empathetic.
>>LISA: Yes, you are correct.
And this is your
biggest motivator.
>>HUBBARD: Yes, the
mass empathy and love.
And so by connecting more of us
who are empathetic and loving,
we create a new field
of consciousness.
And you know, that word "field"
is really accurate here.
It's not just any one
project or one solution.
It's an attitudinal field
that reinforces love and makes
cruelty almost impossible.
>>LISA: That's a
beautiful reason.
And I join you in that.
>>HUBBARD: Thank you.
>>LISA: And thank you for that.
And thank you for creating this
incredible energy and resource
for us to understand what it
means to be a universal human.
>>HUBBARD: Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
And if you'd like to hear more
about Barbara Marx Hubbard,
please check out my additional
"Inspiration" interviews
on Gaia.
I am Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.
[THEME MUSIC]